## 1. Unstructured Data is Hard

* This module focuses on ready to use ML APIs and how to use them on unstructured data. When we say unstructured data, we are referring to the data that comes in the form of audio, video, images, freeform text, etc. In this module, we are going to start off by describing why unstructured data is so hard to work with. Then, we will discuss some of the products available on GCP for applying machine learning to unstructured data. As you can see on this slide, two images are shown. One, containing a newspaper page, and another containing a sporting event. There's a lot going on in these images, and presumably a lot of useful information can be extracted from them. For example, what language is the newspaper clip written in? What does the article say? In what year was it published? What sport is being played in the image on the right? What's the flag being waved? The important question is how can we extract this metadata? Do we have such technology? The answer is yes. And we are going to talk about it in this module. Let's give a few real-world example of businesses using unstructured data in their products. Can you differentiate between snow and cloud cover in these two images? One of GCP's customer, Airbus Defense and Space, works with satellite imagery such as this, and it's very important that they can detect and correct imperfections in the images, such as the presence of cloud formations. Historically, this imperfection correcting process was time-consuming, prone to error, and not scalable. Airubs solved these issues with machine learning. If you are stumped like I am, the clouds are in the upper-right part of the right image, highlighted in red. As another example, consider the realm of health and diagnostics. Diabetic retinopathy is a disease that can lead to irreversible blindness. Fortunately, the disease can be caught early and treated by inspecting retinal photographs like the ones here. Unfortunately, a specialist is required to inspect these photographs and make a diagnosis. Furthermore, such specialists are not very common in the part of the world where diabetes is most prevalent. Google worked with a team of specialists to build a deep learning algorithm to automate the process of diagnosing diabetic retinopathy where training on labeled images like the ones shown here. That's powerful. How can you map from images like this to a label using machine learning? Adding to the complexity, keep in mind that medical images are usually extremely high resolution, and so processing them takes a lot of compute. Google Cloud platform offers a number of products that can help businesses make sense of their unstructured data. These products, such as Cloud Vision API and Dialogflow, are based on both Google's data and models. You don't have to worry about training models with your data. You simply pass the products your data wire and API, and they will return predictions. It's really hard to train models on unstructured data. Consequently, developing something like vision recognition model is out of Reach for most businesses. On the downside, if your unstructured data is not within the scope of the data used to train Google's pre-trained models, the APIs won't give you good results. This is what we mean when we say common ML tasks.

## 2. ML APIs for Enriching Data

* Let's take a closer look at the actual APIs Google offers to make sense of your unstructured data. We know that in a typical business scenario a company ends up using data that is being generated from multiple sources. Typical examples of widely used data are RDBMS inventory, SAp and Spreadsheets. These data sources use strict data formatting rules and host data accordingly. Hence, the data is known as structure data. Apart from these a lot of data is donated from variety of other sources in the form of email, audio, video, images, text, social media likes and comments. All these types of data are typically free from strict formatting has known as unstructured data. As a business a prominent and important question is how to process unstructured data, which typically constitutes 90% of entire business data? This type of data has tremendous potential to provide detailed insights, which can benefit the business. In this section we will see which AI technologies can be used to process this unstructured data to have business impact. In this module, we are going to concentrate on the cloud natural language API for processing unstructured data in the form of text. However, keep in mind that there are equivalent APIs for image, video and audio data. Again, when we say that we are enriching unstructured data, we are saying that we are applying labels to it. We are providing labels for questions like what is the subject of this email? And does this comment have positive or negative sentiment? The NLP API provides many features with which text analytics can be performed. The first feature is Syntactic Analysis. Syntactic Analysis first breaks up text into a series of tokens, which are generally words and sentences, and provides information about the tokens internal structure and its role in the sentence. It can label a token as a noun or a verb, singular or plural, first person or second person, masculine, feminine or neutral. And provides grammatical information such as case, tense, mood and voice. Here is an example of the entity and this is output for a small piece of text. By the way, you are free to try this out of navigating to the cloud NLP API homepage yourself and inputting your own text. You can see how Lawrence of Arabia is correctly tagged as a proper noun. In production the NLP API's output is returned as a JSON object. At the time of this writing the API supports ten languages. See the outline documentation for current language support. The Cloud NLP API also offers entity analysis for recognizing people, locations, organizations, events, artwork, consumer products, phone numbers, addresses, dates and numbers. For our text, notice how TE Lawrence is tagged as a person and Lawrence of Arabia is tagged as a work of art. The second feature provided by the NLP API is Sentiment Analysis. Sentiment Analysis identifies the emotional opinion of our writers attitude. It's presented as a numerical score and a magnitude for the intensity of the feeling. It does not identify specific emotions, but groups them into generally positive, negative or neutral. For example, sad and angry are both negative, while funny and happy are considered positive. Note the sentiment analysis output for our short piece of text here. The score of a documents sentiment indicates the overall emotion of the document. Our score of 0.8 indicates a very positive document as expected. The magnitude of a document sentiment is proportional to the length of the document and tells us how much emotional content is present within the document. Entity sentiment analysis combines both entity analysis and sentiment analysis, and attempts to determine the sentiment positive or negative expressed about entities within the text. Entity sentiment is represented by a numerical score and magnitude and is determined for each mention of the entity. Those scores are then aggregated into an overall sentiment score and magnitude for an entity. In our example the sentiment score for pizza of 0.9 is very high, as expected. Finally, the NLP API classifies what your text is all about. At the time of this writing content is classified into 620 categories. In our Lawrence of Arabia example, the API correctly predicts that the text is about a movie with 91% confidence.

## QuizNotes

* Most business data is unstructured data, and mainly text
	* True
* Google Cloud's pretrained model APIs use:
	*  Google's models and Google's data