## 1. Introduction

* The tips sections of this course are organized around the data engineer exam guide outline. The outline divides the exam into sections that focus on specific priorities and information about the job role. So this course follows the outline, explaining each section of the course, providing tips, and highlighting information that would be useful to know. Some items in the outline are important to the job of a professional data engineer, but they're not technical, or maybe they're not specific to Google. For example, a data engineer needs to know how to present solution proposals to customers and to communicate with executive staff. That isn't something we currently teach, but you should know it from experience or learn it on your own. I'll identify these items when they appear in the outline. This course isn't about following some pattern exactly. It's about being useful to help you decide the best ways for you to prepare for the exam. I think these three categories of data representations, pipelines, and processing infrastructure are a good way of organizing the information. And it helps you prepare for the exam by surfacing what's important. It's not just a list of details or trivial facts that are being tested. It's the ability to perform the job, which means thinking through data engineering problems in the abstract. And using these categories of abstraction, it's a good way to organize your thinking about preparing for the exam. So wrapping up this point, the general organization of the class is that it follows the exam guide, but more specifically, we cover topics where they make the most sense for learning. Finally, I want to highlight to you that we're all different. You have unique experiences, knowledge, and skills. So there isn't one right way to prepare for the exam. What's most important in this process is that you're exposed to many different ways to prepare and many different kinds of resources. And through this exposure, you can define your own unique and individualized approach to preparation. A word about ML, which stands for machine learning. In recent years, the industry evolved from database technologies to big data and data processing technologies. And now the industry is continuing to evolve from big data to machine learning. Big data didn't replace database technology. Hadoop isn't a replacement for MySQL. And machine learning and TensorFlow does not replace or eliminate big data or Hadoop in any way. But what it does is it brings an entirely new perspective to data engineering. For the first time, we can take data that was complicated, and maybe even collected without any particular purpose in mind, and we can extract business intelligence from it. Machine learning enables product innovation, making products better, and process innovation, making processes more efficient, and it brings a new kind of analysis to business decision-making. So ML isn't a subject that's tacked on or just included along with data engineering. It's a major part of data engineering, and you'll see it mentioned extensively in this course. Here's an agenda for this course. The course begins by discussing what the certification is about, how it's positioned relative to other certifications, and more specifically, how it's designed relative to your job role, experience, and career aspirations. The next three modules in the course cover specific preparation tips and technologies. Some of the information in these parts are what you might expect. Information on how to choose among related technologies, for example, under what conditions would you choose Bigtable over BigQuery? But there's other information. One of the things we do in this course is highlight some sophisticated element of data engineering on Google Cloud. This is a way for us to convey many topics very fast. For example, one slide describes that subnets extend across zones within a region. This characteristic is unique to Google Cloud and different from most other cloud vendors. The reason for this design is it makes designed for reliability easier since adjacent instances can be in the same subnet but on different zones, giving them fault isolation. Now, that's a pretty sophisticated concept, but it's important for a data engineer to know when designing processing infrastructure on the Google Cloud. So in this course, we don't teach you about regions or zones or subnets. That information is covered in our other courses. But what we do is highlight the skill you need to know for the job, and then you'll either know the dependent concepts on which it's based or you can go study them to fill in the gaps. It seems pretty obvious, but you should know that you can't expect to pass the exam from taking a single course. You can't learn everything you need to know to be a competent professional data engineer in a single course or in a single day. But what you will get from this class is a high-level overview of subject areas and tips, and practice with exam-taking skills, and that'll help you prepare. If you've already been studying and preparing for the exam, this course will help you develop a good sense of what else you need to study or whether you're ready to attempt the exam. 

## 2. Understanding the Professional Data Engineer certification

* The main thing you need to know about the Professional Data Engineer certification is that it isn't a theoretical test. The certification has been designed to confirm the skills required of a practitioner, specifically it tests whether you know how to do the job of a data engineer. It doesn't just test whether you know lots of general information, it ask questions to see if you can think like a data engineer and solve problems like a data engineer. Look, that means the certification is going be more challenging than other certifications you may have heard about that only test on information, but it also means that the certification means something and that's one reason it's highly valued in the industry. The practical nature of the exam makes it challenging, but it also makes it valuable. I just want to caution you that the Associate Cloud Engineer is not a simpler or an easier data engineer exam or Cloud Architect exam. All of these certifications are based on real-world practical job skills required and used by practitioners in the industry. A Cloud engineer uses the same technology as the data engineer, however their job focus is different and so their skills are different. For example, a data engineer might consider how to design a Cloud Dataproc cluster so it meets customer requirements. A Cloud engineer might run jobs on the cluster and be more focused on monitoring the cluster and measuring and maintaining its performance. A data engineer designs the solutions and implements it. A Cloud engineer operates a solution, monitors it, maintains it and evolves it as business circumstances change. So which certification or certifications you might want depends on your job role, the job you have or the job you want to have. A main differentiator between the professional level of certification and the associate certification is the focus on designing and on business requirements. If you're involved in designing, planning, proof-of-concept and identifying the business needs, then you should be looking at the professional data engineer certification. If you're going to focus on implementing and operating, and on the technical requirements, then you should consider the associated certification. In addition to the business requirements, there are differences in the technical requirements. For example, a Cloud engineer might need more practice operating and maintaining a solution whereas a data engineer might need to know more about how different options will change how the solution is operated and maintained. They're related technical skills, but serve a different purpose and perspective. Here's some direct advice to help you decide where to start. If your job focus is mainly on business requirements and not on implementation or if your job does not focus on businesses requirements but only on technical requirements, start with the Associate Cloud Engineer certification, the ACE. If your job involves all three; business requirements, technical requirements and implementation, start with the Professional Data Engineer certification, and if your job is not associated with any of these, then start with ACE. The exam is about two hours. In the US as an example, the cost is about $200. You can check local prices and currencies online. The exam is available globally, you have to take it at a criterion testing center. Let's see, what else can I tell you. You're not allowed to have scratch paper, a pen, or notes. No drinks are allowed. You can take a bathroom break, but the time continues to count down and many people report that they used the entire two hours. Here's some general tips. The certification offers a practice test, use it. There's also a lot of opportunities in this course to practice and develop good test-taking skills. Also I think it's a good idea to look at each possible answer as if it were the only answer available and evaluate whether it could be true or not. Do this before choosing from the alternatives and finally, pace yourself. Avoid getting bogged down on any single question. There are two general approaches to preparing for the certification exams. The first approach which is most common is what I call cram for the exam. That is, you start with basic information, like the information covered in our courses and you review that information and make sure you've mastered and you can recall the majority of it. Then you research and practice, and practice, and practice. In formal education science, this is called the mastery method and once you're proficient, you can attempt the exam. This class uses a different approach. We identify key points, some of them are complex or subtle and if you understand and know those points, you have an indicator that you have knowledge of all the elements that go into that solution. If you don't understand a point or sense that you're missing or weak on some aspects, you can note those items and use that as a guide for what to study. Fill in the gaps on what you need to know by going back to the training that contains them or by exploring documentation or labs to solidify your understanding, rehearse the problem-solving skills of the profession and when you're proficient, then you can attempt the exam. The benefit of the bottom-up approach is that it doesn't skip anything. On the other hand, a lot of time is spent covering things you already know. The benefit of the top-down approach is that it respects the studying and work you've already done, so it helps you focus much more quickly on what you need to learn. There's far less time spent reviewing information you already know. Should you guess or you're better off leaving an item blank? Well, there's no advantage to leaving a question unanswered. Some of the most important features of this exam is that you can bookmark questions you're unsure about and you can review those questions later. You can actually do iterative rounds if you have the time. So answer the easiest and most certain questions first, then answer the next and the next until what's left are the questions that are hard for you. The ability to bookmark items and come back to them is really powerful. I suggest that you practice this way, like when you're studying practice recognizing when you don't know something or you're not sure about it and bookmark it for later consideration. Then go back and take a look at your bookmarked answers and see if you still agree with your original response. Many of the tips you'll learn about today are intended to help you sort out the case information and identify the core question. You need to make sure that you're answering the questions being asked. It's not just an exam taking skill, it's a part of the skills required for a professional data engineer. Think of data engineering on Google Cloud as a platform with many different ways to get the job done. There are many solutions. For example, you can always install open-source software on a compute engine instance, like you can install MySQL or Hadoop and that might be one solution, but you can also use services that are provided like Cloud SQL and Cloud Dataproc. So quite often there are multiple solutions that could technically work, but there's one best solution that meets the business needs and the technical requirements. Finally, I suggest that you identify the fundamental information you need to know for each technology. What's a technology or service commonly used for, when is it appropriate or best to use that technology, how do you control access to it, is access at the project level or the dataset level or is it perhaps narrower? Are there different roles defined, how do you monitor and manage performance, and what are the strategies for data distribution, for distributed processing, for scaling, for backup? What are the key features that give the service unique value and when would you use those features. As you go through this course, note what you know and what you don't know and that'll help you spend your time wisely studying the areas where you need to learn or learn better.

## 3. Exam Tips #1

	Read through the exam guide outline.

	https://cloud.google.com/certification/guides/data-engineer/
	
	The outline communicates how an authority thinks about and organizes the skills required of a Professional Data Engineer.
	
	Training tends to be organized in a ramp; basic concepts first, building into more complex and difficult concepts later. The Exam Guide is not training. So it is not 	organized for learning, or by importance, or by process. It is organized according to how a group of experts thinks about the job.
	
	There is no additional information about what any particular line means; no explanation.
	
	TIP - Use the Exam Guide outline to help identify what to study.
	The recommendation is for you to read through each line and think about what it actually means, what do you think it is saying about the job? Then ask yourself if you understand that aspect of the job and if you feel you have the skills required to be successful in that part of the job. If yes -- great. It is an indicator that you 	are prepared. If no -- take note. You may want to study additionally in that part or develop specific skills for that item in the Exam Guide.

## 4. Exam Tips #2

	Product and technology knowledge
	You need to know the basic information about each product that might be covered on the exam.
	
	You need to know:
	What it does, why it exists.
	What is special about its design, for what purpose or purposes was it optimized?
	When do you use it, and what are the limits or bounds when it is time to consider an alternative?
	What are the key features of this product or technology?
	Is there an Open Source alternative? If so, what are the key benefits of the cloud-based service over the Open Source software?
	
	Which products and technologies
	Training and Certification meet at the JTA -- the Job Task Analysis -- the skills required of the job.
	The scope of the exam matches the learning track and specialization in training. So a great place to derive a list of the technologies and products that might be on the exam is to look at all the products and technologies that are covered in the related training. The training might not cover everything. But it is a good place to 	start.
	
	Study methods
	Training is great. Digging into the online documentation can be very instructive and covers more detail than can be covered in a class, so documentation tends to have more equal coverage of features, whereas training has to prioritize its time. Getting hands on experience can help you understand a product or technology much better 	than reading and is the kind of experience a professional in the job would have. So labs can be a great way to prepare.